RFC:  Liberty buildpack (#66)
paketo-buildpacks/rfcs: text/0000-ibm-liberty-buildpack.md

# Paketo Community IBM Liberty Buildpack

## Summary

1. Create a Cloud Native Buildpack for the purpose of installing the IBM [OpenLiberty](https://openliberty.io/) Java runtime. 
2. Create a new top-level multi buildpack that packages up Eclipse OpenJ9 & OpenLiberty for use by application developers.

## Motivation

A [ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack](https://github.com/cloudfoundry/ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack) exists in the cloudfoundry community and is widely used and popular.  This RFC will
take that buildpack to the next level, cloud native.  This buildpack will eventually replace the v2 CF ibm-websphere-buildpack.   

## Detailed Explanation

### IBM OpenLiberty Buildpack

This buildpack has the purpose of installing the IBM Open Liberty. It will will be based on the Paketo [apache-tomcat](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/apache-tomcat) buildpack. 

This buildpack will participate if all the following conditions are met:

- `<APPLICATION_ROOT>/WEB-INF` exists or

> -  A liberty server directory exists or

Reviewer: Can we describe how a liberty server directory is identified? A server.xml file at the root of the app dir?

Author: The liberty server directory is identified when a server.xml exists in `--path`.    If you have an on-prem Liberty server already configured, `--path` would point to the server's configuration directory:  `$LIBERTY_HOME/wlp/usr/servers/serverName`.

For example, if the server name is `defaultServer`, the directory structure would look like this:

wlp/usr/servers/defaultServer/server.xml
wlp/usr/servers/defaultServer/app
wlp/usr/servers/defaultServer/app/MyApp.war

The buildpack would contribute the server.xml and war. 

https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cloud-foundry-public?topic=cloud-foundry-public-options_for_pushing#server_directory

Reviewer 2: >The buildpack would contribute the server.xml and war

I'm not sure I follow this point. Do you mean the user contributes? You're saying that a user would `pack build -p wlp/usr/servers/defaultServer`, so the user would provide server.xml & the WAR. Or am I missing something about what the buildpack would do?

Reviewer 2: I'm also wondering, is the server.xml required? The first bullet here says 

>`<APPLICATION_ROOT>/WEB-INF` exists

which would mean that the user `pack build -p my/file.war` only and no server.xml. Is that something which would be supported?

Author: @dmikusa Yes, my intention is the user would `pack build -p wlp/usr/servers/defaultServer` and the buildpack would find the app and server.xml to contribute.  

The buildpack has a default server.xml that would be used if one is not provided.

> -  A liberty packaged server exists and

Reviewer: In what cases would we encounter a packaged server? If you pass a archive to `pack build` or most other platforms the platform will add the extracted contents to the app dir. Also, our existing build tool buildpacks look for an artifact after building and replace the source code with the expanded artifact. Therefore, I would image we would always encounter an expanded server rather than a packaged one?

Author: The packaged server is similar to the server directory.   The contents of the archive would be similar to the contents of the server directory.   The platform extracting the archive is actually helpful.   The buildpack would just need to copy the server.xml and app to the location where the liberty server expects. 

This is not yet implemented and in order to expedite the delivery of the buildpack it may have to be delivered in the future.

## Rationale and Alternatives

There is no currently available buildpack that provides the OpenLiberty runtime.  As IBM moves away from WebSphere Liberty in favor or OpenLiberty, we want to create a new cloud native buildpack 
instead of modifying the existing cloud foundry buildpack.  

## Implementation
The buildpack.toml will include 2 versions of both open liberty and websphere liberty and be updated on a 4-week cycle to coincide with the 4-week liberty release cycle.  
Open Liberty is released under the [Eclipse Public License - v1.0](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/master/LICENSE) and will be included in the buildpack.toml.
  
```
  [[metadata.dependencies.licenses]]
  type = "EPL-1.0"
  uri  = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/master/LICENSE"
``` 
Our intent is to provide a similar configuration as openliberty's [Dockerfile](https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.docker/blob/master/releases/21.0.0.4/full/Dockerfile.ubuntu.adoptopenjdk11). 

Avaiable configuration environment variables include:
* BP_LIBERTY_VERSION - The version of Liberty specified as a specific release or use semver.  Default TBD.  

> * BP_LIBERTY_PACKAGE - For open liberty one of the following: full or kernel-slim. For websphere liberty one of the following: webProfile7, webProfile8, javaee7, javaee8, or kernel.  Default TBD. 

Reviewer: Just to make sure I am understanding correctly, does this imply that the buildpack.toml will need 14 configured dependencies - two versions for each type of packaging?

Author: Yes, that is correct, two version for each type.

> * BP_LIBERTY_PACKAGE - For open liberty one of the following: full or kernel-slim. For websphere liberty one of the following: webProfile7, webProfile8, javaee7, javaee8, or kernel.  Default TBD. 

Reviewer: I noticed https://github.com/cloudfoundry/ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack uses the term `type` for this. Maybe `BP_LIBERTY_PACKAGE_TYPE` would be more explicit? I am not sure I would be able to guess what this is referring to from the name.

Author: Good suggestion, I will rename the variable.

> * BP_LIBERTY_USE_WLP - Indicates that the WebSphere Liberty runtime should be use instead of Open Liberty.  Default false.  

Reviewer: Going off the existing cloudfoundry liberty buildpack I assuming this is a case where the user needs a Liberty License. If so, we should elaborate on the interface for providing the license to the buildpack (probably a binding?) and where and how it is used (e.g. is it needed to install, needed at runtime, or both?).

Author: Open Liberty is open source so I don't think we need to worry about licensing.  For WebSphere Liberty, we can use a similar mechanism as the cloud foundry liberty buildpack to provide a license key to the buildpack at build time.  A license is not needed at runtime.   I will investigate using bindings in a buildpack and update the RFC.

## Prior Art

This buildpack will contribute a liberty runtime similar to how the [ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack](https://github.com/cloudfoundry/ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack) provides the websphere 
liberty runtime in cloud foundry v2 buildpacks.  

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

* Defaults need to be decided and defined. 
* WebSphere Liberty is not open source and is subject to a commercial license.  How can we deal with that in a Paketo buildpack?
* What are the API specifications for the automation tooling to check for new releases and create a PR? 

> 

Reviewer: What if the user is [installing liberty via maven](https://openliberty.io/blog/2018/07/27/installing-features-from-maven-dependencies.html) or gradle during the build, does the liberty buildpack need to do anything extra in this case or should it opt-out?

Author: This scenario is not something I considered.  Initially, the buildpack will only download the liberty runtime based on dependencies in the buildpack.toml.  In the future we can investigate and consider how we can contribute the liberty runtime provided by maven or gradle.

# Paketo Community Liberty Buildpack

## Summary

1. Create a Cloud Native Buildpack for the purpose of installing the [Open Liberty](https://openliberty.io/) Java runtime. 
2. Create a new top-level multi buildpack that packages up Eclipse OpenJ9 & Open Liberty for use by application developers.

## Motivation

A [ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack](https://github.com/cloudfoundry/ibm-websphere-liberty-buildpack) exists in the cloudfoundry community and is widely used and popular.  This RFC will
take that buildpack to the next level, cloud native.  This buildpack will eventually replace the v2 CF ibm-websphere-buildpack.   

## Detailed Explanation

### Open Liberty Buildpack

This buildpack has the purpose of installing the Open Liberty. It will will be based on the Paketo [apache-tomcat](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/apache-tomcat) buildpack. 

This buildpack will participate if all the following conditions are met:

> - `<APPLICATION_ROOT>/WEB-INF` exists or
> -  A liberty server directory exists
>       a server.xml exists in the --path  or
> -  A liberty packaged server exists 
> 	  an unarchived zip file exists containing a wlp/usr/servers/*/server.xml in the --path and
> - `Main-Class` is NOT defined in the mainfest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<APPLICATION_ROOT>/WEB-INF` exists or
-  `<APPLICATION_ROOT>/server.xml` exists or
-  `<APPLICATION_ROOT>/wlp/usr/servers/*/server.xml` exists and
- `Main-Class` is NOT defined in the manifest
```
Is this what is meant?

When a directory or archive is passed to pack with `--path` it is recursively copied to or expanded to the application directory (which is referred to as `<APPLICATION_ROOT>` is the java buildpack READMEs).
